Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on basics of logic gates.
Let's unpack the mystery of this concept
without needing a PhD or a panic attack.
Concept explanation.
So what are these logic gates?
You ask array?
They are the fundamental
building blocks, the bricks and
cement of any digital system.
Think of them as tiny electronic circuits,
little decision makers inside a computer.
They take one or more binary inputs,
which is just a fancy way of saying
zero or one representing low or high
voltage, and then produce a single
binary output based on a very specific
logical rule types of logic gates.
There are several types of
these gates, each with its own
personality and unique logical job.
First we have the and gate.
This one is very strict.
The output is one only if
all its inputs are one.
Otherwise, it gives a big fad zero.
For example, if A is zero and
B is zero, output is zero.
A is zero, and B is one.
Output is still zero.
A is one, and B is zero.
Output is again, zero, only
when A is one and B is one.
The output is one.
Next is the orate.
This one is more relaxed.
The output is one.
If any, input is one.
The only way it gives a zero
is if all inputs are zero.
So if A and B are both,
zero, output is zero.
But if A is zero and B
is one, output is one.
A is one and zero.
Output is one, and if A and B are
both, one, output is of course one.
Then there's the knot gate,
also called the inverter.
This one is a rebel.
It has only one input, and it's
output is always the opposite.
If you give it a one, it gives you a zero.
If you give it a zero, it
gives you a one simple.
Now, for the combinations, the Nand
gate is basically a knot and gate.
It's an and gate followed by a
knot gate, so it's output is zero.
Only when all inputs a one.
Otherwise, the output is always one.
This gate is a universal gate
because you can build any other
gate using only Nan Gates.
Very powerful.
Similarly, we have the norgate or not,
or an OR gate followed by a not gate.
Its output is one only
when all inputs are zero.
Otherwise, the output is zero.
Like its cousin nand.
It is also a universal gate.
Then comes the xor gate or exclusive,
or this one is interesting.
The output is one only if the inputs
are different from each other.
So if A is one and B
is zero, output is one.
If the inputs are the same, like zero and
zero, or one and one, the output is zero.
Finally, the X nor gate or
exclusive, nor it's an X or
gate with a knot gate attached.
It's the exact opposite of xr.
The output is one, if the inputs
are the same, and zero, if they are
different, real world relevance.
Now you might be thinking,
sir, this is all theory.
Where is the real world connection array?
It's everywhere.
Understanding logic gates is
absolutely crucial for knowing
how our digital world functions.
Especially in something as
important as banking systems from
transaction processing to the
security that guards your money.
They are the core of decision
making in computer networks and
automated banking operations.
Think of transaction validation,
security ATMs and their embedded systems.
Digital authorization logic,
even credit score evaluation at
the hardware and software level.
The big banking servers and network
routers are all powered by these
simple but brilliant gates, breakdown
of question types for your exam.
You should know the kind
of questions to expect.
About 30% of questions will ask
you to identify a gait type just
from its symbol or truth table.
Another 25% will involve completing
truth tables for given expressions.
Around 20% will test your skills
in simplifying Boolean expressions.
A smaller 15% will ask you to analyze a
full logic circuit to find its output.
And finally, a tricky 10%
might involve gait conversion.
For example, building an and gate using
only Nan Gates formulas and tricks.
To become a master, you need to know the
magic formulas first, you must memorize
the truth tables for all the gates.
Then come the Boolean algebra identities.
Remember these?
A plus zero is a a plus one is
one A multiplied by zero Is zero.
A multiplied by one is a a plus.
Its opposite.
A prime is one A
multiplied by its opposite.
A prime is zero.
Also A plus A is just A and
A times A is also just a. The
double negative or a prime.
Prime is simply A, and don't forget
the superstars d Morgan's theorems.
The first is A B prime
equals A prime plus B prime.
The second is A plus B. Prime
equals A prime, B prime.
These are your best
friends for simplification.
Methods of solving.
So how do we attack the problems?
There are a few standard methods.
First is truth table construction.
You identify all your input variables.
Then you list all possible
combinations of inputs.
Remember, for N inputs, you have
two to the power of end combinations
For each combination, you find the
output of each gate step by step
until you get the final output.
Second is Boolean Alge
algebra Simplification.
Here you write the logic circuit as a
Boolean expression, and then apply all
those lovely identities and theorems,
especially D Morgans, to simplify it
until it can't be simplified anymore.
Third is circuit analysis.
This is like being a detective.
You assign binary values.
Like zero or one to the inputs.
And then trace these values through
each gate, calculating the output
one by one until you reach the
final output for the whole circuit.
Shortcuts and smart techniques.
Now for the smart techniques,
the jugar of Logic Gates.
First, universal gait recognition.
Just burn this into your brain.
Nand and nor are universal.
They can be configured
to make any other gait.
Second for D Morgan's quick application.
When you see a complement over multiple
variables, just change the operator
inside and to, or, or, or to, and and
complement each variable individually.
It's a huge time saver.
Third, use pattern
recognition in truth tables.
Quickly spot the patterns.
If you see a truth table that is all
zeroes except for the very last row,
your brain should immediately shout.
And gate.
Finally, for very simple
circuits, use visual inspection.
Don't waste time on a full truth table.
Often you can just trace the inputs
with your eyes and get the answer.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
Please be careful of these
common traps my friend.
A classic error is confusing.
Nand or nor with, and or, or always
remember, the N means not so.
NAND is not.
And another big one is the incorrect
application of d Morgan's theorem.
People often forget to compliment
all the individual variables.
Also watch out for silly errors
in truth table rows like missing a
combination or a calculation mistake,
and please do not misinterpret X or
X, nor XR means different inputs.
Give one and XNOR means same inputs.
Give one.
Lastly, while ignoring input
order is fine, for many gates, it
is good practice to maintain the
order to avoid confusion in complex
circuits W Edge Framework summary.
So let's wrap it up in a nutshell.
What are Logic Gates.
They are digital electronic
circuits doing logical operations.
Why are they important?
They are the fundamental basis
of all digital systems and
computers for making decisions.
When are they used in designing
microprocessors, memory units, control
systems, and almost all digital devices?
Where are they found?
Inside computers, calculators, your
mobile phone, ATMs, basically every modern
electronic gadget who deals with them?
Electrical engineers and
computer scientists, and anyone
in digital circuit design.
And how do they work Simple by taking
binary inputs and producing a single
binary output based on a predefined rule.
Fully worked out examples.
Let's solve some problems.
Example, one question.
Which of the following Logic
Gates has an output of one?
Only when both of its inputs
are different, A and B or C.
X-O-R-D-X-N-O-R understand the
question before moving to explanation.
The question is asking for a
gait where the output is one.
When inputs are different, like
zero and one or one and zero,
let's recall our truth tables.
The and gait gives one
only when both inputs are.
The OR Gate gives one if
at least one Input is one.
The X norgate gives one.
When inputs are the same, the x, O or
gate is the one that gives an output of
one only when the inputs are different.
So the correct answer is C. Example two
question, simplify the Boolean expression
A, A plus B. A A, B, B, C, A plus B, DAB.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Okay?
Let's simplify this.
We start with A, A plus B first.
We apply the distributive
law, which gives us.
A, A plus A point B. Now we use
the I Potent law, which says
that a point A is just A, so our
expression becomes A plus a B.
Finally, we apply the absorption
law, which states that A plus A
point B is simply A, so the entire
expression simplifies down to
just a, the correct answer is.
A example three question.
What is the final output X of
the following logic circuit.
If input A is equal to one and input
B is equal to zero, assume the circuit
consists of an and gate with inputs A and
B, followed by a knot gate on its output.
A zero B one, CAD, B, understand the
question before moving to explanation.
Let's trace the values.
The circuit is an and gate
followed by a knot gate.
This is actually a N gate.
The inputs are A equals
one and B equals zero.
These go into the and gate
first for an and gate.
If the inputs are one and
zero, the output is zero.
This output of zero then becomes
the input for the knot gate.
The knot gate inverts its input, so an
input of zero becomes an output of one.
The final output X is therefore
one correct answer is B. Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.